[ENH] BEP 003: Common Derivatives (#265)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/05-derivatives/01-introduction.md

# Goals and scope

Derivatives are outputs of common processing pipelines, capturing data and
meta-data sufficient for a researcher to understand and (critically) reuse those
outputs in subsequent processing. Standardizing derivatives is motivated by use
cases where formalized machine-readable access to processed data enables higher
level processing.

## Storage of derived datasets

Derivatives can be stored/distributed in two ways:

1.  Under a `derivatives/` subfolder in the root of the source BIDS dataset
    folder to make a clear distinction between raw data and results of data
    processing. Each pipeline has a dedicated directory under which it stores
    all of its outputs. There are few restriction on the directory name; it is
    RECOMMENDED to use the format `<pipeline>-<variant>` in cases where it is
    anticipated that the same pipeline will output more than one variant (e.g.,
    `AFNI-blurring`, `AFNI-noblurring`, etc.). For the sake of consistency, the

>     subfolder name MUST be a substring of `PipelineDescription.Name` field in

Reviewer: Can we update this, so it's not a substring but the exact string ? The example below would then be:

```
<dataset>/derivatives/fmriprep-v1/sub-0001
```

Author: It is still a substring, but what about:

```
the `PipelineDescription.Name` field MUST be a prefix of the subfolder name,
optionally followed by a hyphen and a suffix.
```

Or similar?

Reviewer: Ah, yes, sorry, it's a substring of the whole string ! But the exact string before the hyphen :) 

What about :

```
the subfolder name MUST be the `PipelineDescription.Name` field in `data_description.json`,
optionally followed by a hyphen and a suffix.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion, @emdupre.

Reviewer: Thank you !

| PipelineDescription.Name                    | REQUIRED. Name of the pipeline that generated the outputs. In case the derived dataset is stored as a subfolder of the raw dataset this field MUST be a substring of the derived dataset folder name (a.k.a. `<pipeline_name>` - see above). |
| PipelineDescription.Version                 | OPTIONAL. Version of the pipeline.                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| PipelineDescription.CodeURL                 | OPTIONAL. URL where the code for the analysis can be found.                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| PipelineDescription.DockerHubContainerTag   | OPTIONAL. Docker Hub tag where the software container image used in this analysis can be found.                                                                                                                                              |

> | PipelineDescription.SingularityContainerURL | OPTIONAL. URL where the Singularity software container image used in this analysis can be found.                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 2: Is there a strong reasoning behind providing a Docker container reference via tag, but a Singularity container reference via URL? While these may conform to expected current usage, I don't see any logical reason why one could not e.g. provide a URL for a Docker container that's hosted somewhere other than DockerHub, or give a tag for a Singularity container hosted somewhere like Singularity Hub. Would having { `PipelineDescription.ContainerTag`, `PipelineDescription.ContainerURL` } not serve the same purpose but be less restrictive / prescriptive?

Author: @Lestropie I've updated with `PipelineDescription.Container` that mirrors the form of `SourceDatasets`. I can flesh out the subfields, but if we do it for one, we should probably do it for both.

| SourceDatasets                              | OPTIONAL. A list of objects specifying the locations and relevant attributes of all source datasets. Valid fields in each object include `URL`, `DOI`, and `Version`.                                                                        |

Example:

```JSON
{
    "Name": "FMRIPREP Outputs",
    "BIDSVersion": "TODO (depends when this PR will be merged)",
    "PipelineDescription": {
        "Name": "FMRIPREP",
        "Version": "1.2.5",
        "DockerHubContainerTag": "poldracklab/fmriprep:1.2.5"
        },
    "SourceDatasets": [
        {
            "DOI": "10.18112/openneuro.ds000114.v1.0.1",
            "URL": "https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds000114/versions/1.0.1",
            "Version": "1.0.1"
        }
    ]
}
```

## Coordinate systems

> The coordinate system (a.k.a. space) a particular derivative is in SHOULD be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The coordinate system (a.k.a. space) of a particular derivative SHOULD be
```

> denoted using a filename keyword `space` whenever such keyword is present in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
denoted using a filename keyword `space`.
```

> the filename template of a given derivative type. The allowed values for this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The allowed values for this
```

Reviewer 3: the last part of this sentence was unclear. have removed, but can be reworded

keyword depend on the file format:

| File format                  | Description             | Allowed `CoordinateSystem` values                                                                                                                                                                             |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | NIfTI (`.nii` and `.nii.gz`) | Volume data             | Coordinate systems listed in [Template Based Coordinate Systems: Volume](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#volume). If `individual` or `custom` is used then setting `SpatialReference` is REQUIRED   |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| NIfTI (`.nii` and `.nii.gz`) | Volume data             | Coordinate systems listed in [Template Based Coordinate Systems: Volume](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#volume). If `individual` or `custom` is used then setting `[SpatialReference](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/derivatives/05-derivatives/01-introduction.html#spatialreference-key-allowed-values)` is REQUIRED   |
```

> | GIFTI (`.gii`)               | Surface data            | Coordinate systems listed in [Template Based Coordinate Systems: Surface](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#surface). If `individual` or `custom` is used then setting `SpatialReference` is REQUIRED |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| GIFTI (`.gii`)               | Surface data            | Coordinate systems listed in [Template Based Coordinate Systems: Surface](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#surface). If `individual` or `custom` is used then setting `[SpatialReference](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/derivatives/05-derivatives/01-introduction.html#spatialreference-key-allowed-values)` is REQUIRED |
```

| CIFTI (`.nii`)               | Volume and surface data | Coordinate systems listed in [Template Based Coordinate Systems: Hybrid (Volume/Surface) aliases](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#hybrid-volumesurface-aliases)                                     |

Examples:

```Text
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-MNI305_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-fsaverage5_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-R_space-fsaverage5_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-individual_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-R_space-individual_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-HCPMNIfsLR32k_bold.nii
```

## Common file level metadata fields

Each derivative file SHOULD be described by a JSON file provided as a sidecar or
higher up in the hierarchy of the derived dataset (according to
[The Inheritance Principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle))
unless a particular derivative includes REQUIRED metadata fields in which case a

> JSON file is also REQUIRED.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/207#discussion_r291560175

Author: This was a comment from @sappelhoff.

Response:

On the whole, FreeSurfer is not a BIDS-formatted derivative (though it is historically thought of as kind of an opaque derivative), and so attempting to add BIDS metadata inside it is kind of a fool's game. We can try to work with FreeSurfer to get them to add this metadata, but honestly nobody will ever read it, because the metadata only makes sense as part of a BIDS dataset, and no BIDS-parsing dataset will understand FreeSurfer. Or if they do, they know specifically that they're looking at FreeSurfer and the reference will always be T1.mgz.

| ReferenceIndex   | REQUIRED when an index into a 4D (SpatialReference) file is used. Used to index into a 4D spatial-reference file.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

### SpatialReference key allowed values

| **Value name** | **Description**                                                                                                               |
| -------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| orig           | A (potentially unique) per-image space. Useful for describing the source of transforms from an input image to a target space. |

> | uri or path    | This can be used to point to a specific file.                                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: `uri` -> `url`?

    types of files, there may be one or more required metadata fields, in which
    case at least one metadata file containing that field must be located
    somewhere within the file’s hierarchy (per [the Inheritance
    Principle](../02-common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle)).

-   When chaining derivative pipelines, any JSON fields that were specified as
    mandatory in the input files should be propagated forward in the output
    file’s JSON provided they remain valid. Non-required JSON fields can be
    propagated, and are highly useful, but it is the pipeline’s responsibility
    to ensure that the values are still relevant and appropriate to the type of
    output data.

## File naming conventions

-   Filenames that are permissible for a raw BIDS data type have a privileged
    status. Any modification of raw files must use a modified filename that does
    not conflict with the raw filename. Further, any files created as part of a
    derivative dataset must not match a permissible filename of a valid raw
    dataset. Stated equivalently, if any filename in a derivative dataset has a
    name permissible for a raw BIDS data, then that file must be an identical

>     copy of that raw file.

Reviewer 2: Can anyone provide links to any prior conversations regarding this point? I suspect a lot of pipelines would provide, along with any derived image data, a sort of "minimally pre-processed" version of the input data, which could theoretically then be re-used for any of a wide range of things. While I see the appeal of forbidding name clashes between raw and minimally pre-processed data, it does beg the question: how would a pipeline creator then name such a file? Would they simply include some arbitrary keyword (e.g. "`_desc-`") in the filename, the only purpose of which would be to satisfy this criterion? Or could there be some reserved keyword for distinguishing between raw and minimally pre-processed data (since "`_desc-`" could plausibly appear in a raw BIDS data filename)?

The alternative would be that (in addition to the nature of the dataset itself) the contents of sidecar JSONs would distinguish between raw and derived data; e.g. if one contains acquisition parameters only, whereas the other contains fields related to pre-processing steps, it should be clear which is raw and which is derived, even if the filenames are identical.

Not wholly convinced of my own opinion here, so curious to know to what extent it's been contemplated.

Reviewer 2: Additional relevant section later in `02-common-data-types.md` highlighted by @franklin-feingold below: 

> Note that even though `space` and `desc` are optional at least one of them needs to be defined to avoid name conflict with the raw file.

Reviewer 2: Coming back to this now with more experience, I'd suggest that in the absence of any other identifying features, adding "`_desc-preproc`" to the pre-processed variant of image data is wholly appropriate and solves the issue; indeed this should even perhaps be a recommendation in this case.

-   Each Derivatives filename MUST be of the form:
    `<source_keywords>[_keyword-<value>]_<suffix>.<ext>`
    (where `<value>` could either be an `<index>` or a `<label>` depending on
    the keyword)

-   When the derivatives chain involves outputs derived from a single raw input,

>     `source_keywords` MUST be the entire source filename, with the ommission of

Reviewer 2: `ommission` -> `omission`

Author: @Lestropie You can make code suggestions that can be directly applied, e.g.,

```suggestion
    `source_keywords` MUST be the entire source filename, with the omission of
```

See [Adding line comments to a pull request](https://help.github.com/en/articles/commenting-on-a-pull-request#adding-line-comments-to-a-pull-request) item 6.

Reviewer 2: Cool, had not seen that :+1:

# Goals and scope

Derivatives are outputs of common processing pipelines, capturing data and
meta-data sufficient for a researcher to understand and (critically) reuse those
outputs in subsequent processing. Standardizing derivatives is motivated by use
cases where formalized machine-readable access to processed data enables higher
level processing.

## Storage of derived datasets

Derivatives can be stored/distributed in two ways:

1.  Under a `derivatives/` subfolder in the root of the source BIDS dataset
    folder to make a clear distinction between raw data and results of data
    processing. Each pipeline has a dedicated directory under which it stores
    all of its outputs. There are few restriction on the directory name; it is
    RECOMMENDED to use the format `<pipeline>-<variant>` in cases where it is
    anticipated that the same pipeline will output more than one variant (e.g.,
    `AFNI-blurring`, `AFNI-noblurring`, etc.). For the sake of consistency, the

>     subfolder name MUST be the `PipelineDescription.Name` field in

Author: @emdupre A bump on this one.

>     subfolder name MUST be the `PipelineDescription.Name` field in

Reviewer: Thanks for the ping ! Yes, that makes sense. I'm ok with SHOULD, here.

    `data_description.json`, optionally followed by a hyphen and a suffix (see
    below).

    For example:

    ```Plain
    <dataset>/derivatives/fmriprep-v1.4.1/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/vbm/sub-0001
    ```

> 1.  As a standalone dataset independent of the source (raw or derived) BIDS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  As a standalone dataset independent of the source (raw or derived) BIDS
```

Author: Does this not render as `2.`? It's a somewhat common markdown idiom to call everything `1.` and let the renderer do the work for you, which makes life simpler when inserting something mid-list.

Reviewer: ah no it does -- I looked too quickly. Thanks for confirming !

| PipelineDescription.CodeURL   | OPTIONAL. URL where the code for the analysis can be found.                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| PipelineDescription.Container | OPTIONAL. Object specifying the location and relevant attributes of software container image used to produce the derivative. Valid fields in this object include `Type`, `Tag` and `URI`.
| SourceDatasets                | OPTIONAL. A list of objects specifying the locations and relevant attributes of all source datasets. Valid fields in each object include `URL`, `DOI`, and `Version`.                                                                        |

Example:

```JSON
{
    "Name": "FMRIPREP Outputs",
    "BIDSVersion": "TODO (depends when this PR will be merged)",
    "PipelineDescription": {
        "Name": "FMRIPREP",
        "Version": "1.2.5",
        "Container": {
            "Type": "docker",
            "Tag": "poldracklab/fmriprep:1.2.5"

>             }

Author: Hi all, a note that the container description has changed. Please have a look and let me know if you have comments.

    that were created from more than one source dataset. The `sourcedata/`
    subdirectory MAY be used to include the source dataset(s) that were used
    to generate the derivatives.
    Likewise, any code used to generate the derivatives from the source data
    MAY be included in the `code/` subdirectory.

The rest of the Derivatives specification assumes Case 1, but Case 2 applies
after removing `/derivatives/<pipeline_name>` from template names. In both cases
every derivatives dataset is considered a BIDS dataset and must include a
`dataset_description.json` file at the root level. Consequently, files should be
organized to comply with BIDS to the full extent possible (i.e., unless
explicitly contradicted below). Any subject-specific derivatives should be
housed within each subject’s directory; if session-specific derivatives are
generated, they should be deposited under a session subdirectory within the
corresponding subject directory; and so on.

## Derived dataset and pipeline description

As for any BIDS dataset a `dataset_description.json` file MUST be found at the
top level of the particular pipeline:
`<dataset>/derivatives/<pipeline_name>/dataset_description.json`

> In addition to raw BIDS datasets, derived BIDS datasets include the following

Reviewer 4: "In addition to raw BIDS datasets, derived BIDS datasets include the following ... keys". 

This is not clear. I recommend  

"In addition to _the keys for_ raw BIDS datasets, derived BIDS datasets include the following ... keys".

required or recommended `dataset_description.json` keys (a dot in the Key name

> denotes a key in a subdictionary):

Author: We have a sentence, followed by a table, followed by an example. I'm not sure that inserting an example before the table is clearer, rather than cluttering.

For that particular issue, it might be better to improve the PyBIDS error message.

WDYT?

> denotes a key in a subdictionary):

Reviewer 5: Improving the pyBIDS error message is closer to the issue being experienced, so your suggestion sounds reasonable, thanks!

| ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| PipelineDescription.Name      | REQUIRED. Name of the pipeline that generated the outputs. In case the derived dataset is stored as a subfolder of the raw dataset this field MUST be a substring of the derived dataset folder name (a.k.a. `<pipeline_name>` - see above). |
| PipelineDescription.Version   | OPTIONAL. Version of the pipeline.                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| PipelineDescription.CodeURL   | OPTIONAL. URL where the code for the analysis can be found.                                                                                                                                                                                  |

> | PipelineDescription.Container | OPTIONAL. Object specifying the location and relevant attributes of software container image used to produce the derivative. Valid fields in this object include `Type`, `Tag` and `URI`.                                                    |

Reviewer 6: Does `Tag` generalize across container systems (singularity, podman, etc)?

| SourceDatasets                | OPTIONAL. A list of objects specifying the locations and relevant attributes of all source datasets. Valid fields in each object include `URL`, `DOI`, and `Version`.                                                                        |

Example:

```JSON
{
    "Name": "FMRIPREP Outputs",
    "BIDSVersion": "TODO (depends when this PR will be merged)",
    "PipelineDescription": {
        "Name": "FMRIPREP",
        "Version": "1.2.5",
        "Container": {
            "Type": "docker",
            "Tag": "poldracklab/fmriprep:1.2.5"
            }
        },
    "SourceDatasets": [
        {
            "DOI": "10.18112/openneuro.ds000114.v1.0.1",
            "URL": "https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds000114/versions/1.0.1",
            "Version": "1.0.1"
        }
    ]
}
```

## Coordinate systems

> The coordinate system (a.k.a. space) a particular derivative is in SHOULD be

Reviewer 6: The _a.k.a._ should go away or at least be spelled out for readability

In addition, I'd sidetrack the contentious topic of coordinate system vs. space this way:
```suggestion
The spatial reference (_space_ in the following) to which data of a particular derivative is aligned SHOULD be
```

denoted using a filename keyword `space` whenever such keyword is present in
the filename template of a given derivative type. The allowed values for this
keyword depend are identifiers given in section [Image-Based Coordinate
Systems](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#image-based-coordinate-systems).

| File format                  | Description             |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| NIfTI (`.nii` and `.nii.gz`) | Volume data             |
| GIFTI (`.gii`)               | Surface data            |
| CIFTI (`.nii`)               | Volume and surface data |

Examples:

```Text
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-MNI305_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-fsaverage5_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-R_space-fsaverage5_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-L_space-individual_thickness.shape.gii
sub-01/anat/sub-01_hemi-R_space-individual_thickness.shape.gii

> sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-HCPMNIfsLR32k_bold.nii

Reviewer 6: `HCPMNIfsLR32k` does not exist (https://1891-150465237-gh.circle-artifacts.com/0/site/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html#standard-template-identifiers). This should be either
```suggestion
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-fsLR_bold.dtseries.nii
```
or
```suggestion
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-MNI152NLin6Asym_res-32k_bold.nii.gz
```
I would prefer the former as introducing `res-` here would be problematic, and also I think the example was thought out to be a CIFTI file.

| Description      | RECOMMENDED. Free-form natural language description of the nature of the file.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Sources          | OPTIONAL. A list of paths relative to dataset root pointing to the file(s) that were directly used in the creation of this derivative. For example in a chain of A->B->C, “C” should only list “B” as Sources, and “B” should only list “A” as Sources. However in case X and Y jointly contribute to Z, then “Z” should list “X” and “Y” as Sources. |
| RawSources       | OPTIONAL. A list of paths relative to dataset root pointing to the BIDS-Raw file(s) that were used in the creation of this derivative. When the derivative filename does not define a `space` keyword, the first entry of `RawSources` MUST be defined and it will define the `scanner` coordinate system that applies.                               |

> | SpatialReference | REQUIRED when a custom template or file is used. A path to a file that was used as, or can be used as, a reference image for determining the coordinate space of this file. The path should start with a `/` and should be relative to the root of the dataset.                                                                                       |

Reviewer 4: `The path should ...be relative to the root of the dataset.`

To the root of the derivative dataset, or to the root of the raw dataset? Or somewhere in between, if the derivative is nested in a derivative, which is nested in a derivative, which is nested in the raw dataset. See also #471

Author: @robertoostenveld This should be addressed in a7beb3d. Please re-comment if we should consider rewording again.

### SpatialReference key allowed values

| **Value name** | **Description**                                                                                                               |
| -------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| orig           | A (potentially unique) per-image space. Useful for describing the source of transforms from an input image to a target space. |
| uri or path    | This can be used to point to a specific file.                                                                                 |

### Examples

Preprocessed `bold` NIfTI file in `individual` coordinate space. Please mind
that in this case `SpatialReference` key is REQUIRED.

```Text
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.nii.gz
sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.json
```

```JSON
{
    "SpatialReference": "/sub-01/anat/sub-01_desc-combined_T1w.nii.gz"
}
```

> Participant cortical thickness GIFTI file in `individual` coordinate space.

Reviewer 7: `_thickness` is used in this PR but never really introduced as an officially supported suffix.  May be it is ok, and would just need to wait for #207 which [introduces it](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/207/files#diff-4ff87c6142082e27a0f84319b01b85ffR89) and which I guess will chase this PR?

Author: Let's defer this example to come along with the `_thickness` suffix.

# Goals and scope

Derivatives are outputs of common processing pipelines, capturing data and
meta-data sufficient for a researcher to understand and (critically) reuse those
outputs in subsequent processing. Standardizing derivatives is motivated by use
cases where formalized machine-readable access to processed data enables higher
level processing.

> ## Storage of derived datasets

Reviewer 2: Currently, the "common principles" page actually gives more detail / examples / alternatives for storage of derivative data than does the derivatives page. I wonder if the former should focus on definitions of the terms source / raw / derived, and the fundamental conditions of filesystem separation, but defer examples of the various filesystem arrangements to here?

Author: I'm actually thinking we might want to consider the reverse. Instead of separating out discussion of nested-dataset organization into two locations, perhaps it should all go in `common-principles`?

Reviewer 2: Personally content for it to go in either direction.

Reviewer 8: Finally taking the time to go through this. Slight preference for @effigies suggestion.

Derivatives can be stored/distributed in two ways:

1.  Under a `derivatives/` subfolder in the root of the source BIDS dataset
    folder to make a clear distinction between raw data and results of data
    processing. A data processing pipeline will typically have a dedicated directory
    under which it stores all of its outputs. Different components of a pipeline can,
    however, also be stored under different subfolders. There are few restrictions on

>     the directory names; it is RECOMMENDED to use the format `<pipeline>-<variant>` in

Reviewer 9: Here, we use a hyphen `-` as a separator, but in the example below (L36) we use an underscore `_`.

Author: Thanks, I updated these.

| PipelineDescription.Container | OPTIONAL. Object specifying the location and relevant attributes of software container image used to produce the derivative. Valid fields in this object include `Type`, `Tag` and `URI`.                                                    |
| SourceDatasets                | RECOMMENDED. A list of objects specifying the locations and relevant attributes of all source datasets. Valid fields in each object include `URL`, `DOI`, and `Version`.                                                                     |

Example:

```JSON
{
    "Name": "FMRIPREP Outputs",
    "BIDSVersion": "1.4.0",
    "PipelineDescription": {
        "Name": "FMRIPREP",
        "Version": "1.2.5",
        "Container": {
            "Type": "docker",
            "Tag": "poldracklab/fmriprep:1.2.5"
            }
        },
    "SourceDatasets": [
        {
            "DOI": "10.18112/openneuro.ds000114.v1.0.1",
            "URL": "https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds000114/versions/1.0.1",
            "Version": "1.0.1"
        }
    ]
}

> ```

Reviewer 7: How soon upon merge of this PR the release would happen?
Ideally I would hope to have #440 finished (which would expand the format of this record), and see how it could be maximally aligned with #439 .

Author: The current goal is to have 1 week comment (ending next Monday, June 1), 1 week freeze for any final tasks that need doing (unless something critical is found), and release on June 8.

Is there anything that conflicts with #440 or #439? If so, let's try to address it ASAP. I'll try to have a look this afternoon, but feel free to raise any issues here.

    name permissible for a raw BIDS data, then that file must be an identical
    copy of that raw file.

-   Each Derivatives filename MUST be of the form:
    `<source_keywords>[_keyword-<value>]_<suffix>.<ext>`
    (where `<value>` could either be an `<index>` or a `<label>` depending on
    the keyword)

-   When the derivatives chain involves outputs derived from a single raw input,
    `source_keywords` MUST be the entire source filename, with the omission of
    the source suffix and extension. One exception to this rule is filename
    keywords that are no longer relevant. Depending on the nature of the
    derivative file, the suffix can either be the same as the source file if
    that suffix is still appropriate, or a new appropriate value selected from
    the controlled list.

-   There is no prohibition against identical filenames in different derived
    datasets, although users should be aware of the potential ambiguity this can
    create and use the sidecar JSON files to detail the specifics of individual
    files.

-   When necessary to distinguish two files, the `_desc-<label>` keyword-value

>     should be used. This includes the cases of needing to distinguish both

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that this should be a SHOULD in the very general case of "needing to distinguish two files". For instance, say a pipeline generates some derivative data on two different voxel grids, the T1w and the fMRI. So you might have "`_space-T1w`" and "`_space-orig`" in your two otherwise identical file names. This current wording seems to suggest that you SHOULD still nevertheless shoehorn a "`_desc-*`" into each filename. Maybe a more sensible suggestion would be that if there is no more appropriate dictionary keyword by which to disambiguate between two files, "`_desc-*`" should then be utilised?

Author: Changing to:

> "When necessary to distinguish two files that do not otherwise have a distinguishing entity, the `_desc-<label>` keyword-value SHOULD be used."

    differing inputs and differing outputs (e.g., `_desc-T1w` and `_desc-T2w` to
    distinguish brain mask files derived from T1w and T2w images; or `_desc-sm4`
    and `_desc-sm8` to distinguish between outputs generated with two different
    levels of smoothing).

-   When naming files that are not yet standardized, it is RECOMMENDED to use
    names consistent with BIDS conventions where those conventions apply.
    For example, if a summary statistic is derived from a given task, the file
    name SHOULD contain `_task-<label>`.

## Non-compliant datasets

Nothing in this specification should be interpreted to disallow the

> storage/distribution non-compliant derivatives of BIDS datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
storage/distribution of non-compliant derivatives of BIDS datasets.
```

housed within each subject’s directory; if session-specific derivatives are
generated, they should be deposited under a session subdirectory within the
corresponding subject directory; and so on.

## Derived dataset and pipeline description

As for any BIDS dataset a `dataset_description.json` file MUST be found at the
top level of the particular pipeline:
`<dataset>/derivatives/<pipeline_name>/dataset_description.json`

In addition to the keys for raw BIDS datasets,
derived BIDS datasets include the following REQUIRED, RECOMMENDED or OPTIONAL
`dataset_description.json` keys
(a dot in the Key name denotes a key in a subdictionary):

| **Key name**                  | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | PipelineDescription.Name      | REQUIRED. Name of the pipeline that generated the outputs. In case the derived dataset is stored as a subfolder of the raw dataset this field MUST be a substring of the derived dataset folder name (a.k.a. `<pipeline_name>` - see above). |

Author: In #440, it was proposed to add `PipelineDescription` to `dataset_description.json` even for raw datasets, as these are also often produced by some tool, at least in part. The `Pipeline` terminology seemed less suitable to that case, so `ProducedBy` was suggested, and `GeneratedBy` was also suggested to better align with #440 (BEP 028 - Provenance). Further, because multiple tools might be used, the idea was that this `PipelineDescription` field could be a list.

In the interest of not cutting that discussion short, we should consider whether to keep this name and whether to permit or require this field to be a list. I would propose a quick straw poll by response emoji.

Name:

* :+1: PipelineDescription
* :smile: ProducedBy
* :tada: GeneratedBy

Numerosity
* :heart: One entry `{"Name": "X"}`
* :rocket: One or list `{"Name": "X"}` or `[{"Name": "X"}, {"Name": "Y"}]`
* :100: List `[{"Name": "X"}]` or `[{"Name": "X"}, {"Name": "Y"}]`

Tagging @bids-standard/derivatives @bids-standard/raw. Also BEP28 contributors @yarikoptic @cmaumet @satra @remiadon @jbpoline.

Feel free to write in other name suggestions.

Reviewer 10: I cannot select a :100: reaction --> 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/9084751/83064732-8feaf280-a062-11ea-8805-de8305c5dc7f.png)

is this normal?

Author: Sorry, I thought it was an option. Changed to eyes.

Author: There's a consensus forming on `GeneratedBy` and mandatory list (as opposed "object or list of objects"). So I'll go with that. Thanks for responding, folks!

| CodeURL      | OPTIONAL. URL where the code used to generate the derivatives may be found.                                                                                                                                  |
| Container    | OPTIONAL. Object specifying the location and relevant attributes of software container image used to produce the derivative. Valid fields in this object include `Type`, `Tag` and `URI`.                    |

If a derived dataset is stored as a subfolder of the raw dataset, then the `Name` field
of the first `GeneratedBy` object MUST be a substring of the derived dataset folder name.
That is, in a directory `<dataset>/derivatives/<pipeline>[-<variant>]/`, the first
`GeneratedBy` object should have a `Name` of `<pipeline>`.

Example:

```JSON
{
  "Name": "FMRIPREP Outputs",
  "BIDSVersion": "1.4.0",
  "GeneratedBy": [
    {
      "Name": "FMRIPREP",
      "Version": "1.2.5",
      "Container": {
        "Type": "docker",
        "Tag": "poldracklab/fmriprep:1.2.5"
        }
    },
    {
      "Name": "Manual",
      "Description": "Re-added RepetitionTime metadata to bold.json files"
    }

>   ],

Author: Please review the new `GeneratedBy` field, which replaced the `PipelineDescription` field. This field is mandatorily a list, and I have added a keyword "Manual" to indicate manual modification and a free-text "Description" field so a curator can describe their adjustments.

@emdupre Could you check whether the pipeline name/folder name matching text still makes sense to you?

Reviewer: I missed the one week comment period on this, it sounds like -- sorry about that ! I think the current phrasing is less clear but I can old comments as a future PR ?

    Example of derivatives with one directory per pipeline:

    ```Plain
    <dataset>/derivatives/fmriprep-v1.4.1/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/vbm/sub-0001
    ```

    Example of a pipeline with split derivative directories:

    ```Plain
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm-preproc/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm-stats/sub-0001
    ```

    Example of a pipeline with nested derivative directories:

    ```Plain
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm-preproc/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm-preproc/derivatives/spm-stats/sub-0001
    ```

1.  As a standalone dataset independent of the source (raw or derived) BIDS
    dataset. This way of specifying derivatives is particularly useful when the
    source dataset is provided with read-only access, and for publishing
    derivatives as independent bodies of work, or for describing derivatives
    that were created from more than one source dataset. The `sourcedata/`
    subdirectory MAY be used to include the source dataset(s) that were used
    to generate the derivatives.
    Likewise, any code used to generate the derivatives from the source data

>     MAY be included in the `code/` subdirectory.

Reviewer 8: Would it make sense to add a couple of examples after this paragraph too like after the previous one? Or because there are too many possibilities this would just clutter things needlessly?

Author: Nope, let's add examples. Do you want to make a suggestion?

Reviewer 8: Sure. Directly in a PR or do you prefer a first draft here?

Author: PR, code suggestion or just a ```` ```Markdown ``` ```` block here is fine.
